Hey Sjur,

 

This was the text that was part of the proposal. We can use snippets of it for the website:

Shrub encroachment at high latitudes and elevations is one of the most widespread biosphere responses to current climate change. In northern and higher-elevation ecosystems, willows (Salix spp.) are significant encroaching species, and their increased density and distribution across alpine landscapes may strongly affect alpine biodiversity and ecosystem processes. A major challenge in assessing the impact of willows on alpine ecosystems at large spatial scales is to efficiently estimate their density at a fine spatial scale, down to below 1x1 m. Extensive fieldwork across large areas would be necessary, but in practice, only a fraction of the landscape could feasibly be surveyed. While remote sensing data, such as aerial photography and satellite imagery, can be used to study vegetation patterns at large spatial scales, they typically have too low spatial resolution to estimate the density of species at a small scale. Since the large-scale effects of willows on species and ecological processes are shaped by fine-scale interactions, there is a critical need for technologies that can integrate both scales, enabling efficient mapping of willow distribution with high spatial detail.

In this pilot study – a unique collaboration between ecologists (BIO: Ørjan Totland and Suzette Flantua) and remote-sensing scientists (GEO: Benjamin Robson) from UiB – we will explore the applicability of drone-based surveying to estimate the density of willows across large alpine landscapes, including the distribution patterns of male and female willows (pollen producing males are a more valuable food source for bumble-bees). Willows shrubs are locally very abundant and produce large amounts of nectar and pollen from numerous flowers. Willows are likely essential food sources for alpine bumblebees, having direct and indirect effects on the pollination of other flowering plants that depend on bumblebee pollination. This pilot study will provide crucial insights for future research on how climate-driven changes in willow densities may influence bumblebee populations across alpine landscapes and the broader ecological dynamics.

We will first use drone-borne cameras to assess the density of willows in 10 plots covering 1x1 km in the Finse area at Hardangervidda. We will utilize a recently purchased Wingtra fixed wing drone belonging to the Department of Earth Science. This drone is equipped with a Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor and a MicaScence Multispectral camera. The LiDAR sensor will be used to create high-resolution 3D point clouds permitting the volume and structure of willows. For each surveyed plot, we will estimate volume, above-ground biomass, and density of willows. We will validate these estimates using ground-truthing methods with geomatics-enabled tablets. The multispectral imagery of the second sensor, which is sensitive to chlorophyll levels in plants, will be combined with machine learning models to evaluate the feasibility of distinguishing male and female willows.

To explore the relationship between willow density and bumblebee abundance, we will measure the abundance of bumblebees in the center of each plot through time-lapse images of willow flower and plastic sheets mimicking flowers, every 5 minute. To assess if image-based methods correctly estimate bumblebee abundance, we will use the standard transect-walk method by noting every bumblebee observed foraging on willow flowers across the center of the plots. All field work will be conducted during June/July 2025.
Assessing the suitability of drone-based imaging of willow density and gender and camera-based estimates of bumble bee abundance will significantly strengthen our possibilities in obtaining funding from FRIPRO and other sources.